>> Kyle Simpson: So
let's jump into primitive types.
The JavaScript spec lists out
the following primitive types,
undefined, string,
number, boolean, object.
Now these five are there.
And to be honest with you there's
a sixth one that's listed that
I'm not putting here on the list
because it's ES6 and beyond.
And also because it's a primitive type
that nobody even really cares about.
At least, I don't have much use for
the symbol primitive type.
It was added as an actual primitive and
we're not gonna really
cover that in this course.
But there is a symbol there.
But there's a couple of others that
I'll put on the list, function and null.
It is definitely true that
null is a real primitive type.
But what's interesting about function is
that function, though we may think of it
as a type, as a value type, it certainly
has a set of expected behaviors.
By that pragmatic definition,
it is a type, right?
Because the aesthetics of us working with
a code, we can do something different with
a function than we can
with any other value type.
We can call it.
But actually, function is not a real
first class primitive type, actually,
it's a subtype of the object type.
Matter of fact, it's referred to as
a callable object, that's interesting.
>> Kyle Simpson: So
you could say this is seven or six types,
it's really officially these six types
plus the symbol type that I've left off.
[COUGH] That's what we wanna focus
on with these primitive types.
I've highlighted null specifically because
there's a bug with that type that
we'll look at in just a moment.
But as I was saying earlier,
it is the values that have types,
the values that are in these
different classifications.
They're the things that they adopt or
inherit these expected behaviors.
Something we can do with a number
that we can't do with a Boolean, for
example, okay?
So when I use the typeof operator,
for example, and
I do typeof foo, that looks like I'm
asking, what is the type of the variable?
But actually what I'm asking is,
what is the type of the value that
is currently in that variable?
That's what the typeof operator's doing.
Because a variable can hold any type
at any time, we have that freedom.
You may like that freedom,
you may not like that freedom.
If you don't, choose Typescript.
But JavaScript itself
offers us that freedom.
And some of us don't just do that because
we like to write poorly constructed code.
Some of us prefer that freedom.
I prefer to have the freedom to choose
what type I put into a variable.
I don't prefer to do silly things like,
if I have a value that's gonna go
through three different conversions.
I have to come up with three
different variables, and
then come up with some
kind of naming convention.
Like, lowercase b is the first character
to say that it's a boolean, and
lowercase i to say it's an integer,
or whatever.
Those kinds of things, to me, are silly.
I don't like those kinds of conventions,
so
I prefer if it's going to go through
multiple steps, use the same variable.
Cuz I am describing the same thing,
just different representations, so
that's my way of thinking about stuff.
Typescript's great if you like that,
go to the Typescript world.
They're going to enforce that
a variable needs to hold the same
value type at all times.
But you notice something interesting
about this typeof foo here,
there is no foo variable.
I didn't declare a foo there.
The typeof operator is special
privileged and to my knowledge the only
specially privileged mechanism in
the entire language which is able to
deal with a variable that is
non-existent and not throw an error.
Every other mechanism,
if you refer to a variable and
it doesn't exist,
you are gonna get some kind of an error.
But here are the typeof operator
we're referring to a variable that
has not been declared and
yet we get undefined.
Which is interesting because this is
definitely not an undefined variable.
This is an undeclared variable.
But there's a big difference
between defined and declared.
Declared means physically
exists in some scope.
Defined means has some value, has some
useful non-empty value in it, okay?
And JavaScript is not doing us any
favors by conflating these two,
because that just makes
things more confusing.
So I wish the typeof foo here
would give us undeclared,
but unfortunately gives us undefined
exactly the same as if we had
an existent variable with no
value in it at that time.
We get the same value
that's called undefined.
This was designed to be more forgiving of
us accessing variables, like for example,
global variables.
We're doing feature checks through things
and the variable has not been defined,
we don't wanna throw errors.
We don't have to wrap that stuff and
try catch, so
they're trying to be
more forgiving about it.
But what they fail to do is give
it a different return value so
that we can distinguish those two cases,
because they very much are different.
Matter of fact, there will be error
messages that we talk about later when we
get into scope and closure.
There's error messages that will say
things like, foo is not defined.
And you think, well, okay,
then foo is undefined.
Cuz is not defined and
undefined sure sound like they're
saying the same thing, right?
No, foo is not defined is the JavaScript
speak for foo is not declared.
So you see why there's a problem if we use
undefined as a conflation of undeclared.
All right well typeof "foo"
is pretty straightforward.
We get "string", "number",
"boolean", "object".
You notice that the type of operator
always returns one of these six values.
The seventh value being the symbol
type that we are not covering here.
So "undefined", string,
number, boolean object and
function, there are always string values
that come back from the typeof operator.
This is an invariant of this operator.
It can never actually return undefined,
it always would return "undefined".
I've seen many many blog posts and
books somehow made it
through editing where somebody will
something like typeof x === undefined.
And that's nonsense because the type
of operator will never actually return
that value.
It will always return a string, okay?
>> Kyle Simpson: But there's a notable
omission from this list, and
it's the null, why?
Well if we say typeof null,
we get back "object", instead of,
as we may had expect, "null".
Now I had this grand unified theory at
one time of why this was, that nulls,
the history of null was that it was really
designed to zero out object pointer.
So it's kind of like null is this special
global constant object thing or whatever.
That's the theory that I use to espouse.
And one day I was tweeting about that,
this is years back.
But I was tweeting about that and it's
kinda funny because it's almost like if
you tweet about JavaScript it's kind
of like the bat signal for Brandon Ike.
Because to my knowledge he didn't
follow me on Twitter at the time, but
he just showed up in my Twitter mentions.
Here's me just off in random land,
tweeting about JavaScript, and
he shows up and he's like, no, no, no,
no, no, that's crazy, it's just a bug.
So it turns out typeof null
returning "object" is a bug.
There's a question online?
>> Off screen: Yeah, they were just
asking if you could clear up, again,
the difference between undefined and
undeclared.
>> Kyle Simpson: Yeah,
we will go over this again, so
if you've missed that, don't worry.
But undefined and undeclared,
undefined means the variable exists,
but right now it doesn't have any value,
so it has the undefined value in is place.
Kinda like the vacuum of space,
if you will.
If you take everything else out,
it's undefined, okay?
That is an actual value, and
that's when a variable exists but
at the moment has no value.
Undeclared means you literally never
declared it in any scope that that
piece of code has access to.
So in that previous slide
when I said typeof foo and
there was no var foo in scope, foo in
that case was an undeclared variable.
As opposed to a declared variable
that at the moment has no value.
So that's the difference between
undefined and undeclared.
So here we have a var foo that has
been declared, and I say typeof foo.
What am I gonna get back?
>> Off screen: Undefined.
>> Kyle Simpson: "Undefined",
I'm gonna be super picky here, okay?
The string value undefined, "undefined",
that's what I'm gonna get back.
Now what about line 4?
Don't get tricked by line 4,
var bar = typeof bar.
At the moment that we run typeof bar,
does bar exist?
>> Kyle Simpson: We'll get into that when
we talk about scope and the compiler and
all that stuff.
Yes, it absolutely exists.
What is its current value?
At that moment, it's still undefined.
So when I say typeof bar,
what's gonna go into the bar
variable that we see in line 5?
What is the value in bar
gonna be at that point?
It's gonna be "undefined".
And so then on line 6 when I say
typeof bar, what am I gonna get?
"String", same thing with line 8.
What's line 8 gonna return?
>> Off screen: String.
>> Kyle Simpson: "String",
because the typeof 2 is "number" and
the typeof "number" is "string", okay?